# Database-Design-and-Development
Healthcare Design and Development using SQL and Database Management Systems (DBMs)


Scope and Scenario:
This project's scope is a database that would be helpful in a healthcare setting. Specifically, an outpatient clinic that specializes in primary care services. This database will have various entities such as appointments, medical history, patient demographics, medications, diagnoses, lab results, staff information, and billing. The design of this database will be managing and storing patient information/data, which allows healthcare providers to efficiently and accurately access the patient's information and make their decisions based on the data. This clinic would provide primary care services such as routine check-ups and general medical consultations and cater to a diverse patient pool. The staff would include nurses, primary care physicians, medical assistants, administrators, and healthcare providers. 

Entities:
Scheduling Appointments: This entity can include patients' appointment dates, times, and statuses. In addition, it can consist of who they are scheduled with and which provider helped schedule/cancel/reschedule the appointment. 
Medical History: This entity can include information about the patient's medical history, like surgeries and hospitalizations. 
Patient Demographics: This includes the patient's demographic data, such as their name, contact information, date of birth, and gender. 
Medications: This includes the patient's current and past medications, dosages, and how frequently the patient needs to take them. 
Diagnoses: Patient information relating to their diagnosed medical conditions and recommended treatments. 
Staff Information: Includes the healthcare provider's name, contact information, and specialty.
Billing: Billing information for the services provided to the patient, payment, and insurance. This can be automated, thus reducing administrative burden and keeping track of the services efficiently. 

Benefits and Purpose: 
The benefits of this database can improve patient care, communication, provider efficiency, data security, and streamlined billing. It can improve patient care by allowing healthcare providers easy and quick access to patient data and making decisions about the patient’s care. It can improve communication among healthcare providers because they can share patient information with other departments efficiently and effectively. It increases efficiency since all patient data is in one database that can be easily accessed among healthcare providers, avoiding redundant data and reducing the possibility of duplicating patient information. It can improve data security by designing the database to limit who can access patient data to ensure that only authorized providers have access - overall, apply necessary security rules and measures. Lastly, it automates the billing process; with streamlined billing, healthcare providers are less likely to make errors and improve the accuracy of the bills. This allows providers to track patient services, payment, and insurance information, reducing administrative burden. The main purpose of creating this database is to improve accuracy and efficiency when managing patient data in an outpatient clinic. If all the patient's information is in one database, the healthcare providers can access the patient's data quickly, leading to better decisions regarding patient care and improving the services provided.
Example:
My main inspiration for this database is from outpatient clinics like LifeStance Health and Mayo Clinic. They use an electronic health record (EHR) system that gives accessible patient information and scheduling access. The EHR system can have patients' medical history, treatment plans, lab and test results, and medications. EHR is a type of health information technology that allows healthcare providers to manage, create, and store patient data electronically instead of on paper, improving patient care safety and quality. Lifestyle Health is a behavioral health service provider that uses the EHR system to store and manage patient data. The Mayo Clinic is a nonprofit healthcare provider using the same system to store and manage patient data. Both use the EHR system to manage patient information for previously mentioned benefits. 
